It's time for another Framework Aside.
We've already said that we see immediately
invoked function expressions in a lot of
well-used libraries and frameworks in the
JavaScript framework and library space.
So let's talk about IIFES and
safe code and why they're so useful.
So here's basically the IIFE
that I created before.
I create a function expression, tricked
the syntax parser with parenthesis.
Then invoke it, passing a name and
the code inside that code
property gets executed.
And then we can run this and
in the console we see that it runs.
So let's take a look at what's
happening behind the scenes.
Let's think about our execution stack.
Here's the code that I'm running.
My immediately invoked function expression
that's creating this function on the fly
and then executing it, invoking it.
When this code is first loaded,
I have my Global Execution Context.
And nothing's in it because
I have no variables,
no function statements to be hoisted,
or anything like that.
At first anyway.
Then it hits this line, this whole
immediately invoked function expression.
So when it gets to just
the function expression part,
it now creates that
function objected memory.
And it's anonymous.
There's no name.
So it's just this object
that has this code in it.
And then it sees those parentheses
that's actually invoking the function.
And so, as we've already learned,
a new execution context is created for
that anonymous function that I've
just created here on the fly.
And then the code is run line
by line inside that function.
And we've talked about that
after the creation and
then the execution phase
of each execution context.
So we see var greeting equals hello and so
that variable goes into that function's
execution context variable environment.
Right here.
Not into the global but
because we're executing a function,
we have our own execution
context that's running.
So, any variable I declare,
I create inside that function is not
touching the global environment.
It's sitting all by itself,
inside that execution context.
And that is what makes this such
a useful approach to writing your code.
For example, let's say I create
a new file called greet.js.
And it just has a greeting variable in it.
This is some other code
sitting somewhere else.
And I happen to also be referencing it,
above my app.js file.
So, as we've learned, this doesn't
really create anything new or special.
They're just stacked on top of each other.
So, I have greeting as Hola.
And in here I'm also
creating a greeting Hello.
Before this caused a problem.
It caused a collision.
But notice we still say hello.
And there is no problems with
this colliding with that.
Because if I was to
console.log greeting outside
this immediately invoked function,
the Hola is still there.
This line of code didn't crash into it.
Why?
Let's take a look at the execution stack.
Remember the greet.js just
stacks on top of the app.js.
So this is essentially what's run.
When it's run, my global execution context
after this first line is executed,
I have in its memory
a greeting variable Hola.
And then the entire immediately
invoked function is seen.
That function expression
causes it to be created.
The parenthesis cause it to be invoked
which causes a new execution context.
Then when we reach the execution
of that var greeting inside that function,
it's placed there.
So both of those exist.
But in separate execution context,
in separate areas of memory
at separate addresses.
So, I've insured that my code, by wrapping
it in an immediately invoked function,
does not interfere with,
crash into, or be interfered by
any other code that might be
included in my application.
My code is safe.
And so, in a great deal of libraries and
functions, if you open their source code,
the very first thing you'll see at
the top is a parentheses and a function.
And at the very bottom, the end of it.
Because it wraps all its code in
an immediately invoked function.
Makes sense?
That means that we understand what we're
seeing and why when we see this pattern.
And it's something that you can imitate
in your own code to make sure you aren't
colliding with other code when
you're creating something reusable.
We're not accidentally putting
something into the global object.
But what if we wanted to?
Well, we can handle that by
simply passing around parameters.
Remember that objects pass by reference.
So, if I want access to the global object,
I just pass it into my function.
I'll call this global.
And what's the global
object in the browser?
Window.
So I just pass the reference
to my global object into my
immediately invoked function.
So, in this case I could go ahead and
crash against the global
object on purpose.
I call it global here because maybe
you want this code to be reusable on
the server where window object
wouldn't be the global object,
some other object will
be the global object.
But here.
I'm just calling it global, so
I'm not worrying about what is
the global object in this case.
I just know I haven't referenced to it and
I can crash into it.
So now this should overwrite that Hola.
Let's see.
And it did.
I intentionally affected
the global object.
So it may be that you're
creating some object
in your function that you want to be
available everywhere else in your code.
So you can stick it on the global object.
But you're doing it intentionally.
Not by accident,
not because of some code error.
Or because you're not paying attention.
This pattern makes it difficult, makes it
intentional, to affect the global object.
Again, your code is safe.
All right, so that's immediately invoked
function expressions and safe code.